Buzzworm figured that some representations of reality were presented for your visual and aural gratification so as to tap what you thought you understood. It was a starting place but not an ending. Buzzworm tapped your worst phobias. Seemed like he was who he was to offend you. If he sauntered in with an attitude, it was because no matter how he sauntered in, you couldn’t miss him. Might as well make a statement. Besides, how many people got their information from film and TV and the company they keep? Just about everybody thought they knew the truth.

So he could understand the li’l punk who came round here, dissed him bad. Bad. Buzzworm, he didn’t say nothing. Just raised his eyebrow a bit like so. Said, “Homey, I got your number. If you’re bad now, think about when you’re my age, going on forty-five. You be plenty bad. If you alive.”

“Why I gots to be alive when I’m forty-five? Lots don’t make it. So what?”

“You got a point. Guess time goes on, life gets more precious. If you don’t survive, you ain’t nothin’. Anybody can lay down and die. Survivin’s the hard part. I should know. I survived a war. Every day, I wake up, say I made it, one more day. If I can do it, so can you.”

“I’s survivin’. Everybody in the hood survivin’. All the mamas survivin’. Get a check and survive. Dealin’ and survivin’. On the street and survivin’. Fuck that survivin’ shit.”

“When I talk about surviving, I don’t mean pushing a needle up your veins and waiting for the next time. That’s dying. Surviving is what you choose to do. Takes some courage. Takes some sense.”

“Sense. Shit. You don’t make no sense.”

“Little homey like you pack a twenty-two. Think you’re cool. And whatcha doing? Out with the crew marking your territory like some dog. Some other dog come piss on your wall, you gonna shoot him. And I don’t make no sense?” Buzzworm got up. “Catch you later, brother.”

Beeper went off. Was a call from someone just outta doing time in county jail. “Gotta go.” He fiddled with the volume on the Walkman; readjusted it in his ear. Looked at the time and moved on out. Buzzworm didn’t like to waste too much time with those who didn’t want to be reformed. He figured he could be around when the time’s right. Time for everything. Bible said it. For every season, there is a time.

You saw Buzzworm walking the hood every day, walkin’ and talkin’, making contact. Had a wad of cards in his pocket. Card said:


Buzzworm

Angel of Mercy

Central & South Central

Pager # 213-321-BUZZ

24 hrs/7 days


Must be everyone on the street got his calling card with something jotted down on the back: rehab number, free clinic, legal services, shelter, soup kitchen, hotline. He was walking social services. Weren’t for him, been more dead people on the street. Twenty-four-hour service; he meant it. Some poor nobody in trouble at three a.m. paged him, and he was there long before anyone, especially the police.

Everybody knew him. “Hey, Buzz, whassup?” You saw him coming from a long way. Big black seven-foot dude, Vietnam vet, an Afro shirt with palm trees painted all over it, dreads, pager and Walkman belted to his waist, sound plugged into one ear and two or three watches at least on both his wrists.

How many times he’d been stopped for all those watches on his arms. Cops figured he was fencing the things. But like Buzz said, “These part of my collection. Got over two hundred of them, most of them in working mint condition. Worth nothing to nobody but me.” And he was right. This wasn’t no Rolex collection. “Rolex?” Made Buzzworm laugh, “I’m no fool.” The Buzzworm Watch Collection included so-called priceless pieces like one of the first Seiko just-shake-me-up-no-winding watches, a solar-powered watch, a genuine 1961 Mickey Mouse original, a glow-in-the-dark with fluorescent green numbers, a square LCDer with big half-inch numbers, case you had trouble seeing. Stuff like that. Picked out at flea markets. Buzzworm swore by the swap meets where life and death meet, he liked to say. Life for a set of pink Bakelite dishes left by your dead Aunt Polly. Life for a bunch of has-been watches.

Everybody was saying, “Hey Buzz, what time’s it?”

Buzzworm’d say, “Time you dropped in get tested for TB. Epidemic’s in town, just to let you know.” Hands out a card with a number.

“Is it true what they say?”

“What’s that?”

“Old Loco’s in jail?”

“Nah. It’s rehab for the fourteenth time.”

“Do you never give up?”

“Never,” Buzzworm smiles. “I never give up. How about you? Using?”

“Me? Ahn ah. Just plain homeless. Doin’ time without the crime.”

Then someone’d ask, “So what you sportin’ today?”

Buzzworm might point to the middle watch on his left arm. He always had what he calls a conversation piece. Could be a silver thing with a gold trim. All the numbers in gold paint. “This one’s a got a long history.” If you wanted to hear a story, you came round to listen, ’cause Buzzworm always had one. He said, “Belonged to a Creole named Cisco. ’Fore that belonged to his dad. Got the initials on the back. See here, F.D. Francisco Duprey. So I’m told Cisco, the son, pawned this piece off six times. Every time Cisco went back to get the watch, but the sixth time, it wasn’t there. And it was the only thing left of his dad’s legacy. Dad give it to him before he died when Cisco was just a kid. He near went crazy. Pulled the dealer out by the collar. ‘Who’d you sell it to?’

“Dealer says, ‘To you. Don’t you remember? You came in yesterday. It’s yours. Always has been. Always will be.’

“Cisco says, ‘I oughta know if I came in here yesterday. What I be doin’ here today, if I got my watch yesterday?’

“Dealer can’t understand it, ‘I swear. It was you. Course you looked kinda strange. Dressed different from usual. Wearin’ a hat. Nice suit too. Double-breasted pinstripe. Don’t you remember? I asked you where you were going dressed up like that.’

“‘I don’t own no pinstripe and don’t wear hats neither.’

“‘Said you was going to a funeral.’

“‘Funeral?’

“‘Don’t you remember?’ says the dealer. ‘About your tie. It was some crazy tie with a lotta colors. I said you oughta change the tie. Wouldn’t do for no funeral.’

“Cisco about turned green. Pulled a photo from his wallet and showed it to the dealer. ‘This the man?’ Sure enough it was a young dude in a pinstripe with a hat and bright colored tie.

“‘That’s you!’ shouted the dealer.

“‘Nope,’ says Cisco. ‘My old man. Died maybe twenty-five years ago.’

“‘Damn. Guess he came back to get his watch.’

“Two days later, Cisco gets killed walking across the street, hit by a car. Despite he’s never had any money, he’s got this insurance policy for a nice funeral. They lay him out nice and tidy, and just before they close the casket, someone notices the watch. He’s wearing his dad’s watch. This watch.”

So what was Buzzworm doing with Cisco’s watch? “That’s another story,” he said. “Point is: Dead come back.”

That was the way it was. Every watch had a story. And with Buzzworm, just about every story had a watch or time or the philosophy which was as aforementioned: Time for everything.

Like it was time to be listening to Papa John on The Blues Hotel. Program from noon to two p.m. on 88.9 FM. Twenty-four hours, Buzzworm was listening to the radio. From station ID to station ID. Unless he meant business, he had it plugged in like supermarket music, just in the background to help you shop, give a little light rhythm to the situation. It was even hooked into his ear when he was sleeping, just whispering like a suggestive dream. And he listened to everything. He listened to rap, jazz, R&B, talk shows, classical, NPR, religious channels, Mexican, even the Korean channel. Didn’t know a thing they were saying, but he liked the sounds. Fact is, he listened to the sounds so much he could imitate them.

So one day he went to see his Korean friend, the hapkido master, and repeated some sounds he’d been hearing. “So Kwon, what’s it mean? What am I saying?” But Kwon was laughing so hard, he couldn’t talk. You ever seen a hapkido master fall over on the mat laughing? It was a scene. Turns out it was a commercial for a laxative.

Buzzworm said the radio’s a habit. He went through rehab twice before he discovered the radio. Now he didn’t do nothing, not even smoking. Cured the smoking, cold turkey. Cured everything. Maybe it was the sound waves bouncing around the brain cells, massaging the nerves. No need for coffee neither. And it didn’t need to be loud, just there, soft in the background, like an inner voice. Sometimes he tried tapes or CDs, but they were not the same. Not as effective, he claimed. Radio had a special wave, a pulse. AM or FM, it didn’t matter, long as it was coming over the air. When Buzzworm’d unplugged himself from his Walkman, meant he was unplugged from his inner voice, and that had to be a little scary. Not for Buzzworm, but for the one he’d unplugged it for. That’s when you maybe had to watch it. Some thought he wasn’t paying no attention with that thing in his ear, but he was paying plenty attention enough.

Used to be Buzzworm spent all his money on dope and smoke. Now he spent it on batteries. Buzzworm had batteries on him like some people got matches or a lighter, Tums or chewing gum. Maybe it might be cheaper to smoke. Batteries’re expensive. Think about it. Maybe fifty cents apiece on the triple-AS for the Walkman, another fifty cents each on the double-a for the pager, special jobber for the cellular, little jobbers for the watches. One day he figured it out. Conceivably he could spend somewhere around $7.38 a day just for energy. Anybody said they’ve got an expensive habit, Buzzworm reminded them about his. But he said, it’s totally legit. Surgeon General didn’t get on his case either. Even if he might be changing seven, eight batteries of various voltages per day, he did try to conserve; unless there was an emergency, he used rechargeables on a regular basis, and he always had those little puppies recharging. Lately he had got himself a solar-powered radio. Plugged himself direct into the sun. Used it during the day and saved the Walkman for nighttime.

Buzzworm had a thing for palm trees too. Maybe ’cause they’re skinny and tall. Maybe if he put his ear to the trunk of a palm tree, he could hear the radio waves descending from the scraggly fronds at the top. And he really knew his palm trees. Family Palmaceae. Four thousand species. Tall ones called Washingtonia Robusta or Mexican Fan Palm. Similar ones with thicker trunks were called Washingtonia Filifera. Mostly you noticed the tallest Robustas. Buzzworm was always talking about them like he was their personal gardener. You caught him staring at palm trees, seemed like he was talking to them.

Sometimes he made people come out of their houses and appreciate what was on their own front lawn. They came out past their screen doors to take a look up at two spiky trunks topped with what, for all they cared, were giant mops. Green giants in dreads is what. But Buzzworm said, “These here are Phoenix Canariensis.”

“Phoenix Canary what? Buzzworm, what’s this got to do with social services?”

“You understand the species of trees in the neighborhood, you understand the nature of my work.”

They shook their heads, but Buzzworm pointed to the palms, “Could both be more than fifty years old by the looks of them. This one on the right’s female. See the orange blossoms? That’s a female. They’ll turn to fruit soon. You must have noticed them before. Look like dates. One on the left is male. Someone planned it that way. Pair of male and female. This is a very nice pair. Could use some trimming inside here. Also they could use more water. Some people think palms don’t need water, but some water helps. They might well last another fifty years.”

People in the house didn’t know what the hell he was talking about. They probably rented the place and only watered every other week. They didn’t know what good two giant palm trees were except to mark the house where they lived. Seemed like they made a mess when the dead fronds fell, the orange fruit got all over the sidewalk, and the birds made a mess nesting and squabbling about. They said to Buzzworm, “You like these damn palm trees, dig ’em out and haul ’em away. Be our guest.”

“I just want to let you know the age of these fine specimens. Been standin’ here a long time and will continue to long after you and I are gone. These trees’re like my watches here, markin’ time. Palm tree’s smart, knows the time for everything. Knows to put out flowers and fruit when the time’s right, even though out here don’t seem like there’s any seasons to speak of. Suppose we could all learn something from a palm tree that knows the seasons better than us.”

Buzzworm was born and raised near about the corner of Jefferson and Normandie. Said when he was growing up, never noticed trees. No trees to mention. Bushes, dried-up lawns, weeds, asphalt, and concrete. Consequently, no shade this side of town. What’s trees? he always wondered. Never sure about trees, even though he learned to spell it, learned to copy the pictures other kids painted in tempera, two brown strokes for a trunk and that green amorphous do on top, sometimes with red dots they called apples. Never saw one of those in the neighborhood. It was a puzzlement. No trees in this city desert.

One day, however, he was walking his block like always, and he suddenly noticed that row of poles planted every so many yards into the grass or dirt to one side of the sidewalk. His eyes followed the gray-brown poles up to the sky, and for the first time, he recognized what he believed to be a tree. They don’t draw it certain, he thought. Not at all. Brown trunks should be much longer, top do a bush, and absolutely no apples. After that, he started to draw these trees all the time. Too high to see if birds live in them. Too high to check for fruit. But he was sure he had the tallest trees of anyone in the class. He thought if you could get to the top of them, you could see everything. Those trees could see everything. See beyond the street, the houses, the neighborhood. See over the freeway.

And they didn’t seem to need water, just some trimming from time to time, but the wind did that. Blew down the giant fronds making a mess on the street. Sometimes a city crew came by with a man in a basket on a crane and buzzed the old stuff off. Buzzed everything till there was nothing but a little green mop at the top. Looked ridiculous. One time made a mistake and buzzed the whole thing off the top, nothing left but a damn pole. Bald thing for pigeons to sit on from time to time.

Other kids said, “What you drawin’ them ugly palm trees for? If anybody had some sense, they’d hack these poles down and plant some real trees with real shade.”

“Poor people don’t get to have no shade. That’s what porches are for.”

“These palm trees are a mistake. Somebody thought they would grow short; turned out they giants.”

“That’s cause they gotta see over the freeway, over the hood to the other side.”

“Eventually, they gonna cut the tops off. Turn them into telephone poles.”

One day, Buzzworm got taken for a ride on the freeway. Got to pass over the Harbor Freeway, speed over the hood like the freeway was a giant bridge. He realized you could just skip out over his house, his streets, his part of town. You never had to see it ever. Only thing you could see that anybody might take notice of were the palm trees. That was what the palm trees were for. To make out the place where he lived. To make sure that people noticed. And the palm trees were like the eyes of his neighborhood, watching the rest of the city, watching it sleep and eat and play and die. There was a beauty about those palm trees, a beauty neither he nor anybody down there next to them could appreciate, a beauty you could only notice if you were far away. Everything going on down under those palm trees might be poor and crazy, ugly or beautiful, honest or shameful—all sorts of life that could only be imagined from far away. This was probably why the palm trees didn’t need any water to speak of. They were fed by something else, something only the streets of his hood could offer. It was a great fertilizer—the dankest but richest of waters. It produced the tallest trees in the city, looking out over everything, symbols of the landscape, a beauty that could only be appreciated from afar.