No one knew where he came from,

or how long he had lived,

how many years,

decades,

and yet he seemed a child,

yet not such a child to be without season

nor such an old man to be without reason.

When he removed his clothing, he revealed weathered skin stretched like fragile paper over brittle bones, revealed the holes in the sides of his torso and the purple stain across his neck, the solid scars of tissue that padded both his feet. He possessed the beauty of an ancient body, a gnarled and twisted tree, tortured and serene, wise and innocent all at once. Here, in this body-tree—more like bamboo than birch, more like birch than oak, more like oak than pine, more like pine than sequoia, more like sequoia than cactus, more like cactus—was the secret of his youth and the secret of his age.

He said that he had come from a long way away, from the very tip of the Tierra del Fuego, from Isla Negra, from the very top of Macchu Picchu, from the very bottom of the Foz do Iguaçu, but perhaps it was only a long way in his quixotic mind. And yet his voice was often a jumble of unknown dialects, guttural and whining, Latin mixed with every aboriginal, colonial, slave, or immigrant tongue, a great confusion discernible to all and to none at all. Yo soy el Frito Bandito, he said. Bebes Coca-Cola? Stuff like that.

Of course this was part of an accomplished performance, but no one was ever certain whether it was just a performance. No one was certain where or how he had perfected his art. He was actor and prankster, mimic and comic, freak, a one-man circus act. He did it all himself—the animals, the scenery, the contraptions, the music, the sound effects, all the characters, the narration, advertising, and tickets. He did big epics and short poetry—as short as a single haiku—romantic musicals, political scandal, and, as they say, comical tragedy and tragical comedy. And he was not beyond doing provocative, exploitive, or sensational work; timing was everything. Across the border, they had a name for such multiple types: they would call him a performance artist. This designation would entitle him to local, state, federal, and private funding. Well, he didn’t know it yet, but that’s where he was going: North.

He had performed with the greatest, with La Argentina in Buenos Aires, with Carmen Miranda in Rio de Janeiro and Ornitorrinco in São Paulo, with El Teatro Nacional in Santiago, with Cantiflas in la Ciudad de México. At one time he was called the Latino Ronald Reagan—a facetious comparison of his own making, but of course he said he had always turned down Hollywood. He had performed for the people, for the masses, on street corners, in cabarets, in dirty saloons, in churches and plazas, in bordellos and cemeteries. He performed for the rich, the famous, and the infamous; for household names: for Che in Bolivia, for Eva Perón, for Pelé, for Pinochet, and Allende before that, for El General Stroessner, for Pablo Escobar and the DEA, for Noriega, for Vargas Llosa and Fujimori, for Somoza and Sandino, Borges and Neruda, for Archbishop Romero, Porfirio Díaz, and Fidel. When they put him in jail, he performed for his torturers. And when they tortured him, he performed for his fellow inmates. He died a thousand deaths, but they could never shut him up. They could never stop his body, his face, his physicality, the innuendo of a mere muscle, the silence of his presence, the fear of his glare, the emotion of his beating heart, the scream of his absence.

In one installation he wore wings and sat in a cage. Gabriel García Márquez himself came to the opening, drank martinis and tasted ceviche on little toasts in the society of society. Occasionally someone went to the cage and threw in bits of caviar and the olives from their drinks. Then someone noticed that the wings didn’t seem fake, weren’t strapped on or glued to his back, but were growing there. Arcangel. That was his name. His professional name. He turned to the black tie crowd and spread his wings, his thin decrepit body an angular mass beneath those magnificent appendages. Someone turned to García Márquez to ask the meaning of this, but he had disappeared.

And then there was that time in Montevideo on the steps of the opera house when Arcangel played the prophet. Chilam Quetzal, he called himself. (He didn’t sport wings this time. Prophets usually don’t.) He predicted doomsday based on the ancient belief that doom comes in fifty-two-year cycles. The only problem was to decipher when the first doom had occurred and other dooms hence. Perhaps there were a series of small dooms in consecutive fifty-two-year cycles. It was difficult to know. And yet, he stood there at the top of the steps with his calculator, gesticulating and prophesying, his thin body a writhing mass of anguish and foreboding.

The end of the world as we know it is coming!

It will come in 2012,

exactly ten cycles of fifty-two years

from the time Christopher Columbus

discovered San Salvador, Cuba, Haiti,

and the Dominican Republic in 1492!

Think of it!

The last greatest doom that marked

the end of the world as we knew it.

The great discovery!

The great curse!

And this because of a lousy bunch of spices

to hide the putrefaction of meat!

However, he said, it was possible to judge the first doom in the Western Hemisphere as having occurred in 1494 when Columbus discovered Jamaica or in 1498 when he discovered Trinidad and Venezuela. Others might place the first doom in 1502 when Columbus discovered Martinique. By these calculations, doomsday could be predicted to be 2014, 2018, or 2022.

Repent, sinners!

Prepare for the worst!

The fifty-second year is approaching!

Now, if we calculate the first doom

from the time John Cabot discovered

Newfoundland and the North American continent,

he cried, waving his arms, punching numbers into the calculator and reading from the flickering LCD in the sunlight,

then I predict doom will come,

as sure as I am standing here,

in the year of 2017!

Perhaps people thought that doom could be pushed forward and away, that the fifty-second year could be recalculated from a later date, but doom, Arcangel assured everyone, would come anyway. The tremor in his voice was enough to convince everyone.

Ah woe is the great land of Brazil,

discovered in 1500

by Pedro Alvares Cabral.

Doom! Doom! Doom!

Doom in the year 2020!

Or,

Woe is Patagonia

discovered by Ferdinand Magellan in 1519.

In this year also,

Hernán Cortés discovered México.

Ah, all is lost!

Doomed.

Doomed to destruction in 2039!

And what of Argentina

discovered by Magellan in 1520?

Think of it!

The year 2040 is not so far away.

He pointed to a young man.

In your lifetime, you will see it!

If you believe that you will be spared,

think again.

Only death will spare you.

Every year

there has been a historic discovery of our lands

to make the dates of doom a certainty.

It was as he said. In 1524, Giovanni da Verazano discovered North Carolina and the New York harbor, and later, in 1528, he discovered the site of the Panama Canal. In 1534, Jacques Cartier discovered Canada, the Saint Lawrence River, and Quebec. In 1513, Vasco Núñez de Balboa discovered the Pacific Ocean. In 1542, Juan Rodriguez Cabrillo discovered the islands of California, Santa Catalina, and San Clemente and the bays of San Diego and Santa Monica and the Bay of Smoke of San Pedro. In 1602, Sebastian Vizcaíno discovered the Bay of Monterey. In 1610, Henry Hudson discovered the Hudson Bay. In 1621, the Pilgrims discovered Plymouth Rock. There was no escape! If doom did not come as he first predicted, in 2012, then it could also be expected in 2044, 2048, 2054, 2062, 2070, 2078, or 2087.

Doom! Doom!

Look to the past and know the doom that awaits you!

The doom of discovery!

The doom of conquest!

And worse yet,

who among the discoverers

did not plant their seed in this land of discovery?

Now all is lost! We will pay dearly!

I, Chilam Quetzal, the soothsayer, have spoken!

But that was in Montevideo, many years ago.

Lately he had been seen on street corners in México City, juggling balls representing the planets of the solar system while spinning a replica of the sun on his nose. He, like E.T., was very good at this, keeping Pluto on the outer ring, juggling everything—Saturn, Uranus, Venus, Jupiter, etc., even the moon around the Earth—in great ellipses. Children and passersby agreed to hold candles around him to represent the stars. The spectacle produced sudden wonder and, eyes glistening through tears, people emptied their purses and pockets into his waiting hat.

Occasionally he could be persuaded to demonstrate the usefulness of the holes in the sides of his torso. It was shocking, but profitable. Occasionally.

Now, it was Monday, and he awoke. He awoke to all the metaphors that come from the land. He had followed a path across the continent that was crooked, but always heading north. Now he was in Mazatlán. He could hear the waves lapping at the edges of the sand, feel the already-heating breezes flowing from the Sea of Cortez.

He had had a dream. And when he awoke he could still see the dream like a miniature Aleph reflected from his mind to an indefinable point on his visual horizon.